.\" Manpage pour nbpkgquery, adaptée pour NetBSD
.Dd April 5, 2025
.Dt NBPKGQUERY 1
.Os NetBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm nbpkgquery
.Nd query NetBSD packages via pkgsrc
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar command
.Op Ar options
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a command-line tool for querying and managing NetBSD packages through the pkgsrc system. It provides subcommands to display package details, check dependencies, export information, and more.
.Sh COMMANDS
The following subcommands are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm show Ar package Op Fl -binary
Display details of a specified package. Use
.Fl -binary
to query an installed binary package instead of a source package in
.Pa /usr/pkgsrc .
.It Cm search Op Fl M | Fl -maintainer Ar maintainer
Search for a package or list packages by a given maintainer using
.Fl -maintainer .
.It Cm depends Ar package Op Fl -binary
List dependencies of a package. Use
.Fl -binary
for installed binary packages.
.It Cm clean
Clean the package cache (currently a simulation).
.It Cm export Ar package Ar format Ar output Op Fl -binary
Export package details to a file in
.Ar format
(either
.Cm json
or
.Cm csv
) at
.Ar output .
Use
.Fl -binary
for binary packages.
.It Cm whoowns Ar file
Identify which package owns a given file.
.It Cm provides Ar package Op Fl -binary
List files provided by a package. Use
.Fl -binary
for binary packages.
.It Cm revdepends Ar package Op Fl -binary
List packages that depend on the specified package. Use
.Fl -binary
for binary packages.
.It Cm outdated Op Ar package Op Fl -all
Show outdated packages. Without
.Ar package ,
use
.Fl -all
to list all installed packages; otherwise, check the specified
.Ar package .
.It Cm verify Ar package
Verify the integrity of an installed binary package.
.It Cm size Ar package_file
Display the size of a binary package file (.tgz or .tbz), local or remote (URL).
.It Cm history Ar package
Show the installation or update history of a binary package.
.It Cm filelist Ar package Op Fl -binary
List files belonging to a package. Use
.Fl -binary
for binary packages.
.It Cm changelog Ar package
Show recent changes for a source package.
.It Cm diff Ar package Ar version1 Ar version2
Compare two versions of a package (not yet implemented).
.It Cm web-search Ar package Op Fl -source Cm pkgsrc.se | NetBSD
Search for a package online via a specified source (default:
.Cm pkgsrc.se ).
Not yet implemented.
.It Cm sigcheck Ar package
Verify signatures of an installed binary package.
.It Cm notify Cm enable | disable
Enable or disable update notifications.
.It Cm check-updates
Check for available package updates (currently a simulation).
.It Cm about
Display information about the tool (not yet implemented).
.It Cm version
Display the version of
.Nm
(not yet implemented).
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show help for the tool or a specific subcommand.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Display details of a source package:
.Pp
.Dl nbpkgquery show gedit
.Pp
Show the size of a .tgz file:
.Pp
.Dl nbpkgquery size /path/to/0verkill-0.16nb1.tgz
.Pp
Export package details to JSON:
.Pp
.Dl nbpkgquery export gedit json gedit.json
.Pp
List dependencies of a binary package:
.Pp
.Dl nbpkgquery depends firefox --binary
.Pp
Search packages by maintainer:
.Pp
.Dl nbpkgquery search --maintainer "user@example.com"
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /usr/pkgsrc
Default directory for source packages.
.It Pa /etc/mk.conf
Configuration file to customize
.Ev PKGSRCDIR .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev PKGSRCDIR
Specifies the pkgsrc directory (default:
.Pa /usr/pkgsrc ).
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are displayed in red in the terminal, typically with an explanatory message (e.g., "Package not found").
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_info 1 ,
.Xr pkg_admin 1 ,
.Xr pkgsrc 7
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was first introduced in April 2025.
.Sh AUTHORS
Written by [your name or pseudonym, if desired].
.Sh BUGS
Report bugs to [your contact or repository, if applicable]. Some features (e.g.,
.Cm diff ,
.Cm web-search ,
.Cm about ,
and
.Cm version )
are not yet implemented.
